My name is Ziyad Mir. I was born on September 30th, 1991 in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. My parents are originally from Srinagar, Kashmir. My older brother was born two years before me. When I was 3.5 years old, we moved to Toronto, Canada. My second brother was born there. My dad worked as a mechanical engineer, largely for energy companies and ended up at Bruce Power, and we moved eventually to Port Elgin, ON. My mother was a trained biochemist and became a housewife to raise children. She now works at Walmart as a customer service manager.

Saudi Arabia
I don’t remember much about living here, but I remember a few things. I remember going to a school, which I later learned was called the “Indian Embassy School”, which I think is now called the “International Indian School Jeddah”. I don’t recall a single thing about classes, but I have one memory which is faded but for some reason sticks in my head. And then I have one more memory about school. The first is that my teacher was really nice and that she used to help me find the bus -- maybe I kept forgetting where I go to catch the bus, but I remember that I had a teacher who would hold my hand and then help me either figure out how to get to the bus stop or maybe walk me there. I don’t know which one. The other memory of school is that there was a talent show or a show and tell or something like that, and I remember either watching it or maybe being on stage. Life was really hazy around that time. We were young; I was 3.5 when we left, my older brother was 5.5, and my younger brother wasn’t born yet -- my mom must have been pregnant with him near the time we left.

My dad worked at a place called Durrat-Al-Arus, which I remember as a sort of resort on the coast of Jeddah. We’d be in a room during the day with my mom, and she’d teach my older brother and I the alphabet, and how to read, and some simple math. I guess she was my first real teacher. I remember us studying when it was daylight, partially because my mom wanted us to learn, partially because it was too hot to be outside, and partially because what else do you do as a woman in Jeddah with two young boys. When the sun set, I remember slamming shut our books and running outside and down a long paved walkway to the pools. I recall the pools being right by the coast, and we could see an island somewhere in the distance in the red sea. 

High School
In high school, I played a lot of sports, with football (qb) and basketball (small forward) being my favourite. I also played rugby (fullback or wing) and soccer (right defence). I was pretty popular in high school, but it was kinda at a shallow surface level. I think this is because I moved to Port Elgin right before high school started, and it’s a small town where everyone grew up together, so I didn’t have the same times to everyone as the rest of the kids at my school. My first day of high school, I was feeling bold and showed up with a pink collared shirt on. I had a thin little moustache as well. I remember one moment from 9th grade pretty vividly. On the first day of school I had gym class and my teacher, Pete Buttenaar did some random role call and admin stuff with us — I got the sense that he was a no nonsense hard nosed former athlete. On the second day of gym class we went to the weight room and a huge (probably 6’1, 210) kid in my class said to Pete that he could probably bench 200 lbs. Pete laughed and said I bet you $100 you can’t. Ronnie was strong and did it right then, one rep of 200 lbs at around 13 years old — I was pretty shocked but didn’t fully understand since I had never bench pressed anything like that and didn’t know what it meant. A few weeks later, we were playing football for the first time in class. Nobody really knew who I was, other than a couple of the athletic kids who saw me in the summer before school. I remember playing safety and immediately picking the ball off on a deep ball in a jump ball between me and two of the wide receivers. Pete was impressed and told me to come out for football next fall to play for his team (he was the football coach as well). I was cocky and said, yeah maybe, let’s see. Pete said, “let’s see? What else are you going to be down” and we both laughed. After that, I basically was part of the cool kids, who were mostly the athletic kids with a few of their party friends thrown in. One time in the main hall we were all chilling in between class or at lunch, and one a kid named Paul LaTouf came up to me and we were talking. He was about my weight and height, about 5’11 and maybe 175 lbs, athletic looking. You know how some people just have that aggressiveness to them, that real dog in them? That was him — his older brother was a bigger, stronger, meaner version of him as well (later I learned that their dad was exactly the same, and was a police officer or lieutenant at the Nuclear power plant where my dad worked). Anyways, Paul just kept talking in my face and I didn’t take intimidation from anyone. He reached out to push me with both hands on my biceps but I reacted right away and pushed him back — it was like a standstill in a tug of war and I think he was pretty shocked at how strong I was. He was a big, strong kid. But so was I, and it might have been the first time he’d ever come face to face with someone who could kick his ass just as likely as he could kick mine. He never tested me again, in fact nobody in high school ever did after that.

I went to the University of Waterloo in September of 2009 to study systems design engineering. This was a multidisciplinary course, but mainly combined mechanical, electrical and a little software engineering together. As part of this program, I did 6 4-month long internships (or coops) — alternating between school and internships every 4 months. My last three internships were in high tech jobs, as a software engineer at LinkedIn and Google and then as an APM at Google.

There’s actually a funny story about how I ended up at Waterloo to begin with. My older brother had been into computers his whole life. I didn’t quite understand how computers worked that well, didn’t know about all of their settings and how to get them to do what I wanted. It was pretty frustrating, and to add to that my brothers and cousins were much better at computers then me, and would make fun of me because I didn’t know what I was doing. I remember that making me feel like “fuck this”, computedrs suck if they make you feel like this. So as I was heading into 12th grade, when I finally had to decide what to do after, I didn’t know where to go to school or what to study. I saw a (Cameron Diaz?) movie, I think it was called Fools Gold, so I thought it would be cool to be a marine biologist. Be in the sun, swim a lot, spend time in the water and swim with the fishes. Wouldn’t that be kinda cool? But my brother ended up going to Waterloo to study computer engineering. I wasn’t sold and had my own ideas about what was best for me. I remember thinking that I really needed to go to a social university that had strong academics but also strong social stuff. I must have just been parroting that off of some Canadian university forums because I definitely didn’t have any idea what that meant. I’m the type of person where if I don’t really understand something and if I can’t visualize it then I have no clue what to expect at all. so anyway, there was this university that was about as far from Waterloo, where we lived called McMaster it was pretty well known to be good, especially for people going to become doctors and general it seemed like one of the best calls around. The other thing about McMaster was that a lot of people that were pretty cool there and I guess the parties were pretty fun. I decided that I should really be going to McMaster and I kept telling my brother and everyone else that’s probably where I would end up. Nevertheless I applied to Waterloo and listed mechanical engineering program that I wanted to be in and then I got back to my 12th grade year where I was mostly just hanging out. I don’t remember exactly where I was but I think I was in the computer in the basement just a few months into 12th grade when we got early admission results from Waterloo I got in. I was pretty shocked, but relieved and also expected at the same time. It was a weird mixture of feelings that would become pretty normal for me over the next 15 years of my life. I simultaneously knew that I was gonna get but didn’t expect it and was fine with whatever happened anyways. So after I got in, I basically went full chill mode and started playing basketball as much as I could. After the winner, a few of my friends and I would go to Saint Joe Catholic school in Port Elgin, pretty much every day we would spend hours there and play game after game after game. Some of my funniest and most athletic moments have taken place there and in fact, I have a few pictures of me trying to dunk a volleyball in a basketball on that court. The room was a little tilted low, but I was still pretty athletic and could get above the rim. This is also the first time where I started having issues in my lower back, and I wonder if all of those jumps on the concrete without any training and no core strength slipped a disc early at 17. By now it was the middle of the summer and Waterloo is coming up in probably six or eight weeks. So one day I went on the computer to double check exactly what I got myself into and I went to the website for mechanical engineering. I was horrified. It seemed like I had signed up for a physics class. The only thing I could think of as well I freaking hate and I suck at it. I do not want to be doing this, that I didn’t even realize the mechanical engineering was basically a physics program and I was a couple weeks away from stepping onto the Waterloo campus and that degree shaping my life. I knew I had to do something, but I had no idea what, so I went to the engineering website and looked around at what else was offered at Waterloo. Nothing seem that interesting and then I saw it. Systems Design Engineering. my first thought and I shit you not was that I had to be in that program for the very reason that the name just had a nice ring to it. I called up Waterloo and asked them to see if I could transfer into systems. They said they’d get back to me and in the meantime, it took a look at all the courses that were offered. I didn’t really know what a lot of them were, but I like the words that they were using holistic, multidisciplinary, integrated. Sometimes, in life, you know before you actually know, and this is one of those moments. It sounds ridiculous thinking back but in a sense and when I told my friends this, this is how they described it that was a really “me” moment. 

One day though, I got it into my head to install Ubuntu. It might have been my brothers doing, or maybe he mentioned it to me and I was like fuck it, let’s try it. I think I had a Dell laptop at the time, and was so frustrated by how weird everything on Windows was. I just didn’t get how things worked. I could never get it to do what I wanted. I’d get confused or stuck and just couldn’t figure out why I wasn’t able to get the computer to act how I wanted. It was so frustrating. And part of it was probably that pretty much everyone else in my family was good with computers. And when you grow up with a bunch of boys, and they are all good at something and you aren’t — you won’t get much time to learn. Remember, we grew up with just one computer that we all shared. Remember accounts on computers that you had to sign into? 🤣😅 So that day, I found out about wine or dual booting a Windows laptop with Ubuntu, and I installed Linux on my laptop. I didn’t know what it meant to partition a drive, I didn’t understand what it meant to have a bios, or any of that. But eventually, I got it running. And I swear, that was as one of those days that changed my life. I didn’t realize it at the time, but looking back it was one of those pivotal moments for me. I didn’t really know how to navigate Linux to begin with, but I liked how things felt simpler. They felt cleaner. I just felt like I could slowly start to get the computer to do what I wanted. I started learning to use the terminal and the unix utilities. I found it so awesome that I could use one program (the terminal) to control so much of what I wanted to control on the computer. It felt powerful and it felt easier. I started using vim to edit files, and g++ to compile and run programs. I learned about debugging through print statements and reading logs. Little by little I started to get a little more comfortable with the computer. Around this time, my older brother was already at the Universitry of Waterloo and was part of the co-op program there. Each engineering major at Waterloo had a mandatory 4 month internship every 4 months. So during each school semester, students would have to apply and interview with a bunch of companies that came to campus to hire Waterloo co-ops. This was a bunch of Canadian companies, but also all the major companies from Silicon Valkey. As part of the interview process, the companies would ask you coding tests and algorithm questions that you would need to answer, usually optimally, and then code up. So my brother was practicing these problems around that time, and sometimes I’d try to copy him and study some of these problems as well. It was hard, and usually I couldn’t solve most of the problems. But for the first time in my life, outside of video games on them, I started to like computers.

There’s another funny story here about how I first programmed. In tenth grade, we had the option to take more first programming class and I signed up. My teacher was awful. She was unbelievably boring and didn’t have the faintest idea of how to motivate people. So she started teaching us Pascal —- my first programming language was Pascal. The games and things she showed us in class were so boring to me, that I just tried to do the absolute bare minimum and then get rid of this programming thing. I remember making a simple card game for my final project. I barely tried. And it showed. The game sucked, it was buggy and just not something to be proud of. This is something that would mark the next 15 years of my life. I just couldn’t be damned to try hard if I wasn’t genuinely interested in what I had to do. But I always had the wherewithal to be able to scrape by even in those cases. And funny enough — I’m not proud to say this, but Mrs. Parker was also graduate of the University of Waterloo.

Quora
After I graduated, I joined a startup called Quora in May 2014. I stayed there for about a year and a half. This was a fun but stressful time for me - I worked closely with the CEO (Adam D’Angelo) on trying to figure out why Quora’s search traffic wasn’t growing in proportion with its content. In fact, it looked like traffic per piece of content was slightly trending down over time. After a 6+ month experiment where we moved the signup wall back from the first page (“first click free”), it turned out that search traffic started rising monumentally. We hypothesise that there were domain level impacts on Quora penalising traffic from search (as a result of users quickly bouncing from the site when seeing the signup wall on initial page load). But we couldn’t prove this — if we ran experiments on only a small fraction of traffic (eg. 5% of all user traffic getting no signup wall, whereas 95% of traffic getting the wall), then we will only see the local impact on engagement, etc. for the 5% of folks. We will not be able to measure any domain wide effects until Google determines that there should be a domain wide impact. That’s out of our control — what do we do? I felt that the right thing to do was to give people a good user experience; nobody wants to see a wall blocking the content when they search for something and click on a webpage. It’s so frustrating, and that frustration will translate (even subconsciously) into a hate for that website. That negative karma is worth something — but I couldn’t prove this. And I was operating in an environment where logic and data prevailed. I wasn’t equipped with the tools to be able to present a coherent, logical and deep argument — I was embarrassed whenever I was questioned about why this was a worthwhile tradeoff for an experiment. What I wanted was a goahead to launch a no signup wall experiment for the majority of traffic for a long time — blindly (without experimental data backing it). We ran the small scale experiments for a few weeks and saw negligible engagement and retention changes, and no search traffic changes. Adam and the other senior execs would ask and question me on why we should do what I suggested, and I just couldn’t convince them myself. It was painful and agonizing for me. We tried everything else we could beforehand - we enlisted our best engineers (Tao Xu, who later went to Airbnb and OpenAI to help solve AGI, and Jerry Ma, a young Harvard-dropout prodigy who later joined the US government to help in technology patent regulation) to use ML to optimize when and who saw the wall depending on all the user and content signals we had. This didn’t work either. The design time was semi on my side, but they were non committal and political. Engineers seemed to be in my side but stayed in their lane and didn’t want to get involved. I was the DRI (“directly responsible individual”) for the Search Traffic team and I was pounding the table for us to make this change (in my own way, of course, I’m not loud and confrontational — so there was no pounding the table at all and no raised voices and even less direct conflict). I felt pretty trapped. So eventually after months of trying things that summer, Adam finally gave us the goahead to launch the experiment I wanted for 6 months and to see what happened. I was exhausted but relieved — the code changes were so easy, literally “trivial” (which is hilarious because we overuse that term in software so often when it isn’t actually true). But in this case it was - just don’t show a signup walk to users in the experiment variant for the first click. Someone named it “first click free”. Then, we waited. A few weeks went by with nothing. And then it happened: 

The search traffic started exploding off the charts — up and to the right, like it was a meme. Except it was real, and I was the one behind it. We started having Q&A sessions at the weekly all hands and the questions started getting directed at me — “why do we think we are seeing the growth in traffic?” The reality was, nobody knew — not me, not our product council, not Adam, not even the engineers at a Google. Some algorithm had likely seen a site wide step-function increase in retention (page view time) and corresponding reduction in poor UX (bounce rate, short visit rate). But we weren’t in control of this, and we didn’t have transparency into what the Google search ranking algorithms were doing — all we could guess was that we had triggered a reclassification (at the domain level for all quora.com pages) that significantly boosted our rankings in Google. I tried to be as honest as possible when answering those questions, but nobody was satisfied. Looking back, this was a big learning lesson that I didn’t grok at the time but now have a completely different perspective on. In uncertain times, people don’t always want the truth. Sometimes, what people need is a story to believe in. A story that binds together a million threads into a strong, cohesive unit. A story that brings people together. This was an opportunity that I missed — an opportunity to seize the momentum and leverage of the early success, but I wasn’t ready to grab it. In my life and career, this theme has repeated itself, but maybe that’s just an artifact of my reflective nature more than any reality of thr situation at the time. I think I was afraid of the risk — the risk of being wrong, the risk of the search growth stalling, of the charts flatlining, of us not knowing how far this trend would take us. Looking back now (10 years later), I would have massively underestimated how much of an impact this change in search traffic would have on Quora as a company, and how much of a growth driver it would end up become. As of Q2 2024, it is extremely clear that almost all organic growth for Quora comes from search traffic from Google. The opportunity was to double down on the win, increase my position-power by pitching risky but forward looking projects and aggressively growing my scope. I didn’t see it and of course I didn’t take it. I felt terrible inside at how the project had went - I had spent months in my head repeatedly playing multiple perspectives to analyze against each other about what the “right” decision should have been, I had tirelessly built internal conviction that we needed a bold, radical new product experience, had ultimately wrangled together the buyin to do the thing, and it had worked. But I was drained, I didn’t understand then that the right answer (in this case the right product experience) is only one part of the equation (and in some cases not even the most crucial part). I felt sickened at the political games I had to play as a PM, and was no longer enjoying my day to day (side note: retrospectively thinking back, the politics were not at all that bad; it’s just that my baseline expectation was 0 politics and playing the game, so the delta with reality was startling). I wanted to make a change, and I soon started working in a different area. A new, young, energetic and sharp designer joined the company, and we were paired together to tackle some growth and search related problems. We instantly became a power couple — throw us a problem, and we’d go into a room and come up with solutions. A week later the experiments would be out in the world and the results were the same everyone — our variants were green. Every time. Her name was Lucy Guo, and we paired to solve these problems from first principles and threw away all the garbage or overhead we hated seeing. I was coding these experiments, and I was loving it. I asked to switch to the engineering team. My manager and other leads were supportive, but I needed to interview for the new role. I remember Sheryes (the Director of Engineering) interviewing me and asking me to code up a skip list. That was fun. Quora was no joke — you had better have been sharp to make it. I think I barely made the cut, but they let me become a SWE. I quit about 2 months later — I had known the company just wasn’t for me. It was too academic and too classically nerdy and not risk-taking enough for me. It felt limiting and wrong — in hindsight, I was right and it became a huge bottleneck for the company to rely so heavily on one style of product development, but companies are so often just a projection of the founders, and if you know Adam at all then you know exactly what the DNA of Quora is like. What an introduction to Silicon Valley, the amount I got to do, the amount I learned, the responsibility shoved onto my shoulders, the people I met, the secrets I saw…just incredible. For example, one of the two college dropout-turned-SWEs at Quora (the other was the US patent office Director I mentioned above) was Alexandr Wang who later went on to found and CEO Scale.ai. :) I’m grateful for the learnings, the people, the experience.

Opendoor
Near the end of my time at Quora, I got a facebook message from JD Ross, saying that he wanted to meet me in SF from a recommendation he got from Lucy Guo. I went up to SF to meet him, and it turned out he was a founder at a startup that was trying to do something different in real estate: they wanted to buy and sell houses as a company, and they wanted to digitize the home transaction process. They showed me around the office, I talked to engineers and saw the internal tooling they had built to start automating the process, and I was basically sold. The environment was dynamic, energetic, and exciting. I wanted to be there. Before I signed the offer letter, JD and Eric Wu (the CEO) offered to take me out to somewhere in San Francisco for dinner. I didn’t know where to go or what to eat, so I just randomly searched up something I thought wouldn’t make me look like a 23 year old idiot with no clue about good food. We went to La Briciola in San Francisco. I can’t remember anything we talked about it, probably because it was a pretty chill night and we enjoyed some steaks and fine wine (at the time, and even now, I barely know anything about wine, but I'm sure they bought some good stuff). Eric intimidated me, as I always got this sense that when he looked at or talked to me, his mind was processing about 5 things about me all at the same time. It felt like he could read my internal thoughts at the same time I felt them. That was strange to me. Years later, and looking back, I think I can do that to some people, but I'm not sure if they can tell that I'm doing this in the same way that I felt that about Eric years ago.

I joined the company — it’s called Opendoor. Work was fun in a way it had never been before - on one of my first days (it may actually have been my first day), Daniel LaGrotta started pair programming with me to help me understand how to start making changes to their internal tool (we called it the admin tool). This was how Opendoor ran; there was a consumer side (beautiful website and landing page) where people could request offers, and then the process was encoded into workflows behind the scenes that operators at the company could manage using the admin tool.

Mostly everything was done by the operations team. Manually, using the admin tool. I learned a few key lessons here that hadn’t even crossed my mind earlier: that you could fake scale by having humans do the most difficult parts of the process that were hard to automate


